gcc/config/riscv/iterators.md, before:

;; Iterators for the machine description for RISC-V
;; Copyright (C) 2011-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

;; This file is part of GCC.
;;
;; GCC is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
;; under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
;; the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
;; any later version.
;;
;; GCC is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
;; WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
;; MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
;; General Public License for more details.
;;
;; You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
;; along with GCC; see the file COPYING3.  If not see
;; <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.


;; -------------------------------------------------------------------
;; Mode Iterators
;; -------------------------------------------------------------------

;; This mode iterator allows 32-bit and 64-bit GPR patterns to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_mode_iterator GPR [SI (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; A copy of GPR that can be used when a pattern has two independent
;; modes.
(define_mode_iterator GPR2 [SI (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; This mode iterator allows :P to be used for patterns that operate on
;; pointer-sized quantities.  Exactly one of the two alternatives will match.
(define_mode_iterator P [(SI "Pmode == SImode") (DI "Pmode == DImode")])

;; Likewise, but for XLEN-sized quantities.
(define_mode_iterator X [(SI "!TARGET_64BIT") (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; Branches operate on XLEN-sized quantities, but for RV64 we accept
;; QImode values so we can force zero-extension.
(define_mode_iterator BR [(QI "TARGET_64BIT") SI (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; 32-bit moves for which we provide move patterns.
(define_mode_iterator MOVE32 [SI])

;; 64-bit modes for which we provide move patterns.
(define_mode_iterator MOVE64 [DI DF])

;; Iterator for sub-32-bit integer modes.
(define_mode_iterator SHORT [QI HI])

;; Iterator for HImode constant generation.
(define_mode_iterator HISI [HI SI])

;; Iterator for QImode extension patterns.
(define_mode_iterator SUPERQI [HI SI (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; Iterator for hardware integer modes narrower than XLEN.
(define_mode_iterator SUBX [QI HI (SI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; Iterator for hardware-supported integer modes.
(define_mode_iterator ANYI [QI HI SI (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; Iterator for hardware-supported floating-point modes.
(define_mode_iterator ANYF [(SF "TARGET_HARD_FLOAT || TARGET_ZFINX")
			    (DF "TARGET_DOUBLE_FLOAT || TARGET_ZDINX")
			    (HF "TARGET_ZFH || TARGET_ZHINX")])

;; Iterator for floating-point modes that can be loaded into X registers.
(define_mode_iterator SOFTF [SF (DF "TARGET_64BIT") (HF "TARGET_ZFHMIN")])


;; -------------------------------------------------------------------
;; Mode attributes
;; -------------------------------------------------------------------

;; This attribute gives the length suffix for a sign- or zero-extension
;; instruction.
(define_mode_attr size [(QI "b") (HI "h")])

;; Mode attributes for loads.
(define_mode_attr load [(QI "lb") (HI "lh") (SI "lw") (DI "ld") (HF "flh") (SF "flw") (DF "fld")])

;; Instruction names for integer loads that aren't explicitly sign or zero
;; extended.  See riscv_output_move and LOAD_EXTEND_OP.
(define_mode_attr default_load [(QI "lbu") (HI "lhu") (SI "lw") (DI "ld")])

;; Mode attribute for FP loads into integer registers.
(define_mode_attr softload [(HF "lh") (SF "lw") (DF "ld")])

;; Instruction names for stores.
(define_mode_attr store [(QI "sb") (HI "sh") (SI "sw") (DI "sd") (HF "fsh") (SF "fsw") (DF "fsd")])

;; Instruction names for FP stores from integer registers.
(define_mode_attr softstore [(HF "sh") (SF "sw") (DF "sd")])

;; This attribute gives the best constraint to use for registers of
;; a given mode.
(define_mode_attr reg [(SI "d") (DI "d") (CC "d")])

;; This attribute gives the format suffix for floating-point operations.
(define_mode_attr fmt [(HF "h") (SF "s") (DF "d")])

;; This attribute gives the integer suffix for floating-point conversions.
(define_mode_attr ifmt [(SI "w") (DI "l")])

;; This attribute gives the format suffix for atomic memory operations.
(define_mode_attr amo [(SI "w") (DI "d")])

;; This attribute gives the upper-case mode name for one unit of a
;; floating-point mode.
(define_mode_attr UNITMODE [(HF "HF") (SF "SF") (DF "DF")])

;; This attribute gives the integer mode that has half the size of
;; the controlling mode.
(define_mode_attr HALFMODE [(DF "SI") (DI "SI") (TF "DI")])

; bitmanip mode attribute
(define_mode_attr shiftm1 [(SI "const31_operand") (DI "const63_operand")])
(define_mode_attr shiftm1p [(SI "DsS") (DI "DsD")])

;; -------------------------------------------------------------------
;; Code Iterators
;; -------------------------------------------------------------------

;; This code iterator allows signed and unsigned widening multiplications
;; to use the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_extend [sign_extend zero_extend])

;; This code iterator allows the two right shift instructions to be
;; generated from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_shiftrt [ashiftrt lshiftrt])

;; This code iterator allows the three shift instructions to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_shift [ashift ashiftrt lshiftrt])

;; This code iterator allows the three bitwise instructions to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_bitwise [and ior xor])

;; This code iterator allows ior and xor instructions to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_or [ior xor])

;; This code iterator allows unsigned and signed division to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_div [div udiv mod umod])

;; This code iterator allows unsigned and signed modulus to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_mod [mod umod])

;; These code iterators allow the signed and unsigned scc operations to use
;; the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_gt [gt gtu])
(define_code_iterator any_ge [ge geu])
(define_code_iterator any_lt [lt ltu])
(define_code_iterator any_le [le leu])

; atomics code iterator
(define_code_iterator any_atomic [plus ior xor and])

; bitmanip code iterators
(define_code_iterator bitmanip_bitwise [and ior])

(define_code_iterator bitmanip_minmax [smin umin smax umax])

(define_code_iterator clz_ctz_pcnt [clz ctz popcount])

;; -------------------------------------------------------------------
;; Code Attributes
;; -------------------------------------------------------------------

;; <u> expands to an empty string when doing a signed operation and
;; "u" when doing an unsigned operation.
(define_code_attr u [(sign_extend "") (zero_extend "u")
		     (gt "") (gtu "u")
		     (ge "") (geu "u")
		     (lt "") (ltu "u")
		     (le "") (leu "u")
		     (fix "") (unsigned_fix "u")
		     (float "") (unsigned_float "u")])

;; <su> is like <u>, but the signed form expands to "s" rather than "".
(define_code_attr su [(sign_extend "s") (zero_extend "u")])

;; <optab> expands to the name of the optab for a particular code.
(define_code_attr optab [(ashift "ashl")
			 (ashiftrt "ashr")
			 (lshiftrt "lshr")
			 (div "div")
			 (mod "mod")
			 (udiv "udiv")
			 (umod "umod")
			 (ge "ge")
			 (le "le")
			 (gt "gt")
			 (lt "lt")
			 (ior "ior")
			 (xor "xor")
			 (and "and")
			 (plus "add")
			 (minus "sub")
			 (smin "smin")
			 (smax "smax")
			 (umin "umin")
			 (umax "umax")
			 (mult "mul")
			 (not "one_cmpl")
			 (neg "neg")
			 (abs "abs")
			 (sqrt "sqrt")
			 (ss_plus "ssadd")
			 (us_plus "usadd")
			 (ss_minus "sssub")
			 (us_minus "ussub")
			 (sign_extend "extend")
			 (zero_extend "zero_extend")])

;; <or_optab> code attributes
(define_code_attr or_optab [(ior "ior")
			    (xor "xor")])

;; <insn> expands to the name of the insn that implements a particular code.
(define_code_attr insn [(ashift "sll")
			(ashiftrt "sra")
			(lshiftrt "srl")
			(div "div")
			(mod "rem")
			(udiv "divu")
			(umod "remu")
			(ior "or")
			(xor "xor")
			(and "and")
			(plus "add")
			(minus "sub")
			(smin "min")
			(smax "max")
			(umin "minu")
			(umax "maxu")
			(mult "mul")
			(not "not")
			(neg "neg")
			(abs "abs")
			(sqrt "sqrt")
			(ss_plus "sadd")
			(us_plus "saddu")
			(ss_minus "ssub")
			(us_minus "ssubu")])

; atomics code attribute
(define_code_attr atomic_optab
  [(plus "add") (ior "or") (xor "xor") (and "and")])

; bitmanip code attributes
(define_code_attr minmax_optab [(smin "smin")
				(smax "smax")
				(umin "umin")
				(umax "umax")])
(define_code_attr bitmanip_optab [(smin "smin")
				  (smax "smax")
				  (umin "umin")
				  (umax "umax")
				  (clz "clz")
				  (ctz "ctz")
				  (popcount "popcount")])
(define_code_attr bitmanip_insn [(smin "min")
				 (smax "max")
				 (umin "minu")
				 (umax "maxu")
				 (clz "clz")
				 (ctz "ctz")
				 (popcount "cpop")])

;; -------------------------------------------------------------------
;; Int Iterators.
;; -------------------------------------------------------------------

;; Iterator and attributes for floating-point rounding instructions.
(define_int_iterator RINT [UNSPEC_LRINT UNSPEC_LROUND])
(define_int_attr rint_pattern [(UNSPEC_LRINT "rint") (UNSPEC_LROUND "round")])
(define_int_attr rint_rm [(UNSPEC_LRINT "dyn") (UNSPEC_LROUND "rmm")])

;; Iterator and attributes for quiet comparisons.
(define_int_iterator QUIET_COMPARISON [UNSPEC_FLT_QUIET UNSPEC_FLE_QUIET])
(define_int_attr quiet_pattern [(UNSPEC_FLT_QUIET "lt") (UNSPEC_FLE_QUIET "le")])
(define_int_attr QUIET_PATTERN [(UNSPEC_FLT_QUIET "LT") (UNSPEC_FLE_QUIET "LE")])

Commit message:

RISC-V: Add divmod expansion support
Hi all,
If we have division and remainder calculations with the same operands:

  a = b / c;
  d = b % c;

We can replace the calculation of remainder with multiplication +
subtraction, using the result from the previous division:

  a = b / c;
  d = a * c;
  d = b - d;

Which will be faster.
Currently, it isn't done for RISC-V.

I've added an expander for DIVMOD which replaces 'rem' with 'mul + sub'.

Best regards,
Matevos.

gcc/ChangeLog:

	* config/riscv/iterators.md (only_div, paired_mod): New iterators.
	(u): Add div/udiv cases.
	* config/riscv/riscv-protos.h (riscv_use_divmod_expander): Prototype.
	* config/riscv/riscv.cc (struct riscv_tune_param): Add field for
	divmod expansion.
	(rocket_tune_info, sifive_7_tune_info): Initialize new field.
	(thead_c906_tune_info): Likewise.
	(optimize_size_tune_info): Likewise.
	(riscv_use_divmod_expander): New function.
	* config/riscv/riscv.md (<u>divmod<mode>4): New expander.

gcc/testsuite/ChangeLog:
	* gcc.target/riscv/divmod-1.c: New testcase.
	* gcc.target/riscv/divmod-2.c: New testcase.

gcc/config/riscv/iterators.md, after:

;; Iterators for the machine description for RISC-V
;; Copyright (C) 2011-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

;; This file is part of GCC.
;;
;; GCC is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
;; under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
;; the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
;; any later version.
;;
;; GCC is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
;; WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
;; MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
;; General Public License for more details.
;;
;; You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
;; along with GCC; see the file COPYING3.  If not see
;; <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.


;; -------------------------------------------------------------------
;; Mode Iterators
;; -------------------------------------------------------------------

;; This mode iterator allows 32-bit and 64-bit GPR patterns to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_mode_iterator GPR [SI (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; A copy of GPR that can be used when a pattern has two independent
;; modes.
(define_mode_iterator GPR2 [SI (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; This mode iterator allows :P to be used for patterns that operate on
;; pointer-sized quantities.  Exactly one of the two alternatives will match.
(define_mode_iterator P [(SI "Pmode == SImode") (DI "Pmode == DImode")])

;; Likewise, but for XLEN-sized quantities.
(define_mode_iterator X [(SI "!TARGET_64BIT") (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; Branches operate on XLEN-sized quantities, but for RV64 we accept
;; QImode values so we can force zero-extension.
(define_mode_iterator BR [(QI "TARGET_64BIT") SI (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; 32-bit moves for which we provide move patterns.
(define_mode_iterator MOVE32 [SI])

;; 64-bit modes for which we provide move patterns.
(define_mode_iterator MOVE64 [DI DF])

;; Iterator for sub-32-bit integer modes.
(define_mode_iterator SHORT [QI HI])

;; Iterator for HImode constant generation.
(define_mode_iterator HISI [HI SI])

;; Iterator for QImode extension patterns.
(define_mode_iterator SUPERQI [HI SI (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; Iterator for hardware integer modes narrower than XLEN.
(define_mode_iterator SUBX [QI HI (SI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; Iterator for hardware-supported integer modes.
(define_mode_iterator ANYI [QI HI SI (DI "TARGET_64BIT")])

;; Iterator for hardware-supported floating-point modes.
(define_mode_iterator ANYF [(SF "TARGET_HARD_FLOAT || TARGET_ZFINX")
			    (DF "TARGET_DOUBLE_FLOAT || TARGET_ZDINX")
			    (HF "TARGET_ZFH || TARGET_ZHINX")])

;; Iterator for floating-point modes that can be loaded into X registers.
(define_mode_iterator SOFTF [SF (DF "TARGET_64BIT") (HF "TARGET_ZFHMIN")])


;; -------------------------------------------------------------------
;; Mode attributes
;; -------------------------------------------------------------------

;; This attribute gives the length suffix for a sign- or zero-extension
;; instruction.
(define_mode_attr size [(QI "b") (HI "h")])

;; Mode attributes for loads.
(define_mode_attr load [(QI "lb") (HI "lh") (SI "lw") (DI "ld") (HF "flh") (SF "flw") (DF "fld")])

;; Instruction names for integer loads that aren't explicitly sign or zero
;; extended.  See riscv_output_move and LOAD_EXTEND_OP.
(define_mode_attr default_load [(QI "lbu") (HI "lhu") (SI "lw") (DI "ld")])

;; Mode attribute for FP loads into integer registers.
(define_mode_attr softload [(HF "lh") (SF "lw") (DF "ld")])

;; Instruction names for stores.
(define_mode_attr store [(QI "sb") (HI "sh") (SI "sw") (DI "sd") (HF "fsh") (SF "fsw") (DF "fsd")])

;; Instruction names for FP stores from integer registers.
(define_mode_attr softstore [(HF "sh") (SF "sw") (DF "sd")])

;; This attribute gives the best constraint to use for registers of
;; a given mode.
(define_mode_attr reg [(SI "d") (DI "d") (CC "d")])

;; This attribute gives the format suffix for floating-point operations.
(define_mode_attr fmt [(HF "h") (SF "s") (DF "d")])

;; This attribute gives the integer suffix for floating-point conversions.
(define_mode_attr ifmt [(SI "w") (DI "l")])

;; This attribute gives the format suffix for atomic memory operations.
(define_mode_attr amo [(SI "w") (DI "d")])

;; This attribute gives the upper-case mode name for one unit of a
;; floating-point mode.
(define_mode_attr UNITMODE [(HF "HF") (SF "SF") (DF "DF")])

;; This attribute gives the integer mode that has half the size of
;; the controlling mode.
(define_mode_attr HALFMODE [(DF "SI") (DI "SI") (TF "DI")])

; bitmanip mode attribute
(define_mode_attr shiftm1 [(SI "const31_operand") (DI "const63_operand")])
(define_mode_attr shiftm1p [(SI "DsS") (DI "DsD")])

;; -------------------------------------------------------------------
;; Code Iterators
;; -------------------------------------------------------------------

;; This code iterator allows signed and unsigned widening multiplications
;; to use the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_extend [sign_extend zero_extend])

;; This code iterator allows the two right shift instructions to be
;; generated from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_shiftrt [ashiftrt lshiftrt])

;; This code iterator allows the three shift instructions to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_shift [ashift ashiftrt lshiftrt])

;; This code iterator allows the three bitwise instructions to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_bitwise [and ior xor])

;; This code iterator allows ior and xor instructions to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_or [ior xor])

;; This code iterator allows unsigned and signed division to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_div [div udiv mod umod])

;; This code iterator allows unsigned and signed modulus to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_mod [mod umod])

;; These code iterators allow unsigned and signed divmod to be generated
;; from the same template.
(define_code_iterator only_div [div udiv])
(define_code_attr paired_mod [(div "mod") (udiv "umod")])

;; These code iterators allow the signed and unsigned scc operations to use
;; the same template.
(define_code_iterator any_gt [gt gtu])
(define_code_iterator any_ge [ge geu])
(define_code_iterator any_lt [lt ltu])
(define_code_iterator any_le [le leu])

; atomics code iterator
(define_code_iterator any_atomic [plus ior xor and])

; bitmanip code iterators
(define_code_iterator bitmanip_bitwise [and ior])

(define_code_iterator bitmanip_minmax [smin umin smax umax])

(define_code_iterator clz_ctz_pcnt [clz ctz popcount])

;; -------------------------------------------------------------------
;; Code Attributes
;; -------------------------------------------------------------------

;; <u> expands to an empty string when doing a signed operation and
;; "u" when doing an unsigned operation.
(define_code_attr u [(sign_extend "") (zero_extend "u")
		     (gt "") (gtu "u")
		     (ge "") (geu "u")
		     (lt "") (ltu "u")
		     (le "") (leu "u")
		     (fix "") (unsigned_fix "u")
		     (div "") (udiv "u")
		     (float "") (unsigned_float "u")])

;; <su> is like <u>, but the signed form expands to "s" rather than "".
(define_code_attr su [(sign_extend "s") (zero_extend "u")])

;; <optab> expands to the name of the optab for a particular code.
(define_code_attr optab [(ashift "ashl")
			 (ashiftrt "ashr")
			 (lshiftrt "lshr")
			 (div "div")
			 (mod "mod")
			 (udiv "udiv")
			 (umod "umod")
			 (ge "ge")
			 (le "le")
			 (gt "gt")
			 (lt "lt")
			 (ior "ior")
			 (xor "xor")
			 (and "and")
			 (plus "add")
			 (minus "sub")
			 (smin "smin")
			 (smax "smax")
			 (umin "umin")
			 (umax "umax")
			 (mult "mul")
			 (not "one_cmpl")
			 (neg "neg")
			 (abs "abs")
			 (sqrt "sqrt")
			 (ss_plus "ssadd")
			 (us_plus "usadd")
			 (ss_minus "sssub")
			 (us_minus "ussub")
			 (sign_extend "extend")
			 (zero_extend "zero_extend")])

;; <or_optab> code attributes
(define_code_attr or_optab [(ior "ior")
			    (xor "xor")])

;; <insn> expands to the name of the insn that implements a particular code.
(define_code_attr insn [(ashift "sll")
			(ashiftrt "sra")
			(lshiftrt "srl")
			(div "div")
			(mod "rem")
			(udiv "divu")
			(umod "remu")
			(ior "or")
			(xor "xor")
			(and "and")
			(plus "add")
			(minus "sub")
			(smin "min")
			(smax "max")
			(umin "minu")
			(umax "maxu")
			(mult "mul")
			(not "not")
			(neg "neg")
			(abs "abs")
			(sqrt "sqrt")
			(ss_plus "sadd")
			(us_plus "saddu")
			(ss_minus "ssub")
			(us_minus "ssubu")])

; atomics code attribute
(define_code_attr atomic_optab
  [(plus "add") (ior "or") (xor "xor") (and "and")])

; bitmanip code attributes
(define_code_attr minmax_optab [(smin "smin")
				(smax "smax")
				(umin "umin")
				(umax "umax")])
(define_code_attr bitmanip_optab [(smin "smin")
				  (smax "smax")
				  (umin "umin")
				  (umax "umax")
				  (clz "clz")
				  (ctz "ctz")
				  (popcount "popcount")])
(define_code_attr bitmanip_insn [(smin "min")
				 (smax "max")
				 (umin "minu")
				 (umax "maxu")
				 (clz "clz")
				 (ctz "ctz")
				 (popcount "cpop")])

;; -------------------------------------------------------------------
;; Int Iterators.
;; -------------------------------------------------------------------

;; Iterator and attributes for floating-point rounding instructions.
(define_int_iterator RINT [UNSPEC_LRINT UNSPEC_LROUND])
(define_int_attr rint_pattern [(UNSPEC_LRINT "rint") (UNSPEC_LROUND "round")])
(define_int_attr rint_rm [(UNSPEC_LRINT "dyn") (UNSPEC_LROUND "rmm")])

;; Iterator and attributes for quiet comparisons.
(define_int_iterator QUIET_COMPARISON [UNSPEC_FLT_QUIET UNSPEC_FLE_QUIET])
(define_int_attr quiet_pattern [(UNSPEC_FLT_QUIET "lt") (UNSPEC_FLE_QUIET "le")])
(define_int_attr QUIET_PATTERN [(UNSPEC_FLT_QUIET "LT") (UNSPEC_FLE_QUIET "LE")])
